Settings (#80)
etiennebacher/altdoc: vignettes/get-started.Rmd

---
title: Get Started with 'altdoc'
---

## Quick start

> To create, render, and preview a new documentation website, execute these commands from the root directory of your package:

Reviewer: ditto about wrapping text

Author: You want me to wrap everything? Curious why you like text wrapping... ;)

```r
library(altdoc)

### Initialize

> setup_docs(tool = "docsify")

Reviewer: I think you can hide the `tool =`

## setup_docs(tool = "docute")
## setup_docs(tool = "mkdocs")

### Render
render_docs()

### Preview
preview_docs()
```

Below, we explain in more detail what these commands do.

## Installation

```r
install.packages("altdoc")
```

To create documentation websites with either `docsify` or `docute`, you only need to install `altdoc` in `R`.

To use `mkdocs` or its variants (such as `mkdocs-material`), you will first need to install those packages in `Python` using a tool like `pip`. From the command line:

```python
pip install mkdocs mkdocs-material
```

See the [`mkdocs`](https://www.mkdocs.org/user-guide/installation/) and [`mkdocs-material`](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/getting-started/#with-pip) installation guides for details.

## Package structure

`altdoc` makes assumptions about your package structure:

* `vignettes/` stores the vignettes in `.md`, `.Rmd` or `.qmd` format.
* `docs/` stores the rendered website. This folder is overwritten every time a user calls `render_docs()`, so you should not edit it manually.

> * `altdoc/` stores the settings files created by `use_*()` functions. These files are never modified automatically after initialization, so you can edit these files manually to change the settings of your documentation and website. All the files stored in `altdoc/` are copied to `docs/` and made available as static files in the root of the website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `altdoc/` stores the settings files created by `setup_docs()`. These files are never modified automatically after initialization, so you can edit these files manually to change the settings of your documentation and website. All the files stored in `altdoc/` are copied to `docs/` and made available as static files in the root of the website.
```

* `$ALTDOC_VIGNETTE_BLOCK`: Nested list of links to the vignettes. The format of this block depends on the documentation generator.
* `$ALTDOC_VERSION`: Version number of the altdoc package.

Also note that you can store images and static files in the `altdoc/` directory. All the files in this folder are copied to `docs/` and made available in the root of the website, so you can link to them easily.

Interested readers should refer to their chosen documentation generator documentation for more details:

* https://docsify.js.org/
* https://docute.egoist.dev/
* https://www.mkdocs.org/

## Render and update

Once the documentation is initialized, you can render it with:

```r
render_docs()
```

This function will:

1. Render and copy standard `R` package files to `docs/`.
   - Ex: `NEWS.md`, `README.md`, `LICENSE.md`, `CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md`, etc.
2. Render Rmarkdown and Quarto files (`.Rmd` and `.qmd` extensions) from the `vignettes/` directory and store them in `docs/articles/`.
3. Copy Markdown files with extension `.md` from `vignettes/` to `docs/articles/`.

> 4. Convert the manual pages stored `man/` from `.Rd` to `.md` format, and copy them to `docs/man/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Convert the manual pages stored in `man/` from `.Rd` to `.md` format, and copy them to `docs/man/`.
```
